ACTIVITY 2.1a. LET'S TRUST THE CLOCKS

Clock synchronization in a distributed cloud file service

Authors: [add authors]
Date: [add date]


INDEX

1. Introduction
2. What is good time?
3. Synchronization without an external reference
4. NTP infrastructure and Linux configuration
5. NTP symmetric protocol simulation
6. Comparison with Cristian's algorithm
7. Conclusions


1. INTRODUCTION

The cloud file service has a client and a server that execute independently and
communicate through messages. If two clients modify the same document, file
modification times can help detect a possible conflict, but only if the clocks
are sufficiently synchronized. This report studies what sufficiently good time
means and how clocks can be synchronized when a common external time source is
not available.

The practical part simulates the NTP symmetric protocol described in the
professor's laboratory document. The same observations are then used to apply
Cristian's algorithm. The values in Section 5 are an explicit worked
simulation, not measurements taken from a real email exchange; a real group
experiment should replace them with its four recorded timestamps.


2. WHAT IS GOOD TIME?

2.1 Reference and definitions

Time is not simply "good" or "bad". It is good with respect to a reference and
an intended use. For a computer, the reference may be UTC distributed by GPS,
an atomic-clock-backed NTP source, or another clock selected by the system.
For internal synchronization, the reference can instead be one participating
clock or a value computed from several clocks.

We use the following terms:

- Resolution is the interval between updates of the local time register. It
  limits the ability to distinguish close events.
- Deviation (offset) is the difference between the local clock and the
  reference at an instant: theta(t) = tau(t) - t.
- Drift is the rate at which the deviation changes:
  delta(t) = d(theta(t))/dt.
- Accuracy (called precision in the laboratory document) is the maximum
  deviation that can be guaranteed after adjustment.

A clock can have good resolution but poor accuracy, or good accuracy at one
   instant but significant drift afterwards. Temperature, oscillator quality,
   operating-system scheduling and network delay all affect the result. The
   time displayed by a phone or PC is therefore an estimate maintained by a
   clock discipline algorithm, not an exact observation of UTC.

2.2 Requirements depend on the application

For the cloud file service, the relevant requirement is not necessarily
absolute UTC accuracy. We mainly need timestamps from different nodes to be
comparable. If the possible clock error is smaller than the time separating
two modifications, timestamps are useful for conflict detection. If the
modifications are closer than that error bound, the service must treat the
ordering as uncertain or use versions and explicit conflict resolution.

The clock resolution should also be smaller than the shortest interval between
events that must be ordered. Synchronization must be repeated because even a
small drift eventually makes the original adjustment inaccurate.


3. SYNCHRONIZATION WITHOUT AN EXTERNAL REFERENCE

3.1 Proposed message-passing strategy

Assume nodes A and B exchange messages through a channel that does not add
trusted timestamps. A initiates a round and becomes the reference for that
round. The protocol is:

1. A records its local time T1 immediately before sending a request to B.
2. B records its local arrival time T2 immediately after receiving the request.
3. B records its local time T3 immediately before sending the reply. The reply
   contains T2 and T3.
4. A records its local arrival time T4 immediately after receiving the reply.
5. A estimates B's offset and the round-trip delay, and sends an adjustment
   instruction to B or applies the correction locally.

The values cannot reveal the exact one-way delays. If the forward and reverse
   delays are t and t', and B is ahead of A by theta, then:

    T2 = T1 + t + theta
    T4 = T3 + t' - theta

The measured round-trip delay is:

    d = T2 - T1 + T4 - T3

The offset estimate and its error bound are:

    theta_i = (T2 - T1 + T3 - T4) / 2
    accuracy bound = d / 2; theta is in [theta_i - d/2, theta_i + d/2]

The notation above means that the estimate can be wrong by at most d/2 when
no assumption is made about the asymmetry of the two network delays. Repeated
rounds should be performed and the sample with the smallest d selected, since
it has the smallest possible error interval. A more robust implementation can
combine several low-delay samples and periodically correct clock drift.

3.2 Extension to several nodes

With more than two nodes, one node can be elected as the coordinator for each
round. Each node exchanges a timestamp request and reports its offset and
uncertainty. The coordinator chooses a reference time, for example its own
clock or the median of the reported clock values, rejects clear outliers, and
distributes corrections. The uncertainty of each correction must include both
the timestamp measurement error and the network delay bound.

This is internal synchronization: it orders events consistently inside the
cloud service but does not guarantee that the resulting time equals UTC. It
also has a failure point if the coordinator is unavailable, so a new one must
be selected or a distributed averaging method must be used.


4. NTP INFRASTRUCTURE AND LINUX CONFIGURATION

4.1 Hierarchy

NTP is normally organized as a hierarchy of strata. Stratum 0 contains
reference clocks such as GPS or atomic clocks and does not normally serve
ordinary clients directly. Stratum 1 servers are directly connected to those
references. Stratum 2 servers synchronize with several stratum 1 servers, and
lower levels continue the distribution. A client normally selects among
several servers using delay, offset, reachability and stability information.

Multiple sources are important because one source can fail or provide a bad
measurement. NTP also avoids making every client contact a single root server,
which would create unnecessary load and a single point of failure.

4.2 Protocol and Linux configuration

NTP uses timestamped messages and estimates both clock offset and network
delay. In symmetric mode, both peers can exchange timing information. In the
more common client-server mode, the client polls configured servers and uses
several samples to discipline its clock. The clock is normally adjusted
gradually (slewed) when the correction is small, rather than jumping, because
large time jumps can break application assumptions.

On Linux, the active time service depends on the distribution. Typical
inspection commands are:

    timedatectl status
    timedatectl show-timesync --all
    systemctl status systemd-timesyncd

On systems using chrony, the corresponding inspection commands are:

    chronyc sources -v
    chronyc tracking

The configuration should specify several trusted NTP servers, enable the time
service at boot, and restrict unsolicited access when the machine is serving
time to others. The exact file and service name must be checked for the Linux
distribution instead of assuming that all systems use the same daemon.


5. NTP SYMMETRIC PROTOCOL SIMULATION

5.1 Simulated observation

We use milliseconds and select A's clock as the local reference for the
calculation. The four readings are:

    T1 = 1000.000 ms    A sends request
    T2 = 1000.120 ms    B receives request
    T3 = 1000.140 ms    B sends reply
    T4 = 1000.170 ms    A receives reply

The timestamps are chosen to represent a B clock approximately ahead of A and
unequal message delays. They satisfy the protocol's ordering T1 <= T2 and
T3 <= T4 when the clock readings are interpreted with their respective local
clocks.

5.2 Calculations

Round-trip delay:

    d = (T2 - T1) + (T4 - T3)
      = (1000.120 - 1000.000) + (1000.170 - 1000.140)
      = 0.120 + 0.030
      = 0.150 ms

Estimated deviation of B with respect to A:

    theta_i = (T2 - T1 + T3 - T4) / 2
            = (0.120 + 0.140 - 0.170) / 2
            = 0.090 / 2
            = 0.045 ms

Thus, B is estimated to be 0.045 ms ahead of A. A correction would subtract
0.045 ms from B's clock, subject to the selected clock-discipline policy.

The NTP accuracy bound is half the round-trip delay:

    d / 2 = 0.150 / 2 = 0.075 ms

Therefore the actual deviation is guaranteed, under the protocol assumptions,
to lie in:

    [theta_i - d/2, theta_i + d/2]
    [0.045 - 0.075, 0.045 + 0.075]
    [-0.030 ms, 0.120 ms]

The bound is relatively wide compared with the estimate because the two
one-way delays may be asymmetric. In a real experiment we would repeat the
round and use the smallest-delay sample. The uncertainty would then be lower,
although it would never be zero without additional assumptions about the
network.


6. COMPARISON WITH CRISTIAN'S ALGORITHM

6.1 Calculation using the same observations

For Cristian's algorithm, A is the client and B is the server. The elapsed
time measured by A is:

    D = T4 - T1 = 1000.170 - 1000.000 = 0.170 ms

The server timestamp in the reply is T3 = 1000.140 ms. Cristian estimates
that the reply timestamp corresponds to the midpoint of the client interval.
The client's estimated midpoint is:

    T1 + D/2 = 1000.000 + 0.085 = 1000.085 ms

Consequently, using the convention client time minus server time, the
estimated deviation is:

    theta_C = 1000.085 - 1000.140 = -0.055 ms

The client is therefore estimated to be 0.055 ms behind B. The result is not
identical to the NTP estimate because Cristian's calculation uses a server
timestamp and assumes that the timestamp is associated with the middle of the
round trip, while NTP uses all four timestamps.

The minimum one-way transmission time cannot be determined from a single
exchange. If we conservatively assume min = 0, Cristian's accuracy bound is:

    D/2 - min = 0.170/2 - 0 = 0.085 ms

This is slightly worse than the NTP bound of 0.075 ms for this simulated
sample. If a reliable lower bound for min were available, the Cristian bound
would become smaller, but obtaining that bound is itself an additional
measurement problem. The numerical comparison is therefore dependent on the
assumptions, not a universal ranking.

6.2 Advantages and disadvantages

NTP advantages over Cristian's algorithm:

- It uses four timestamps and explicitly estimates both offset and round-trip
  delay, so it can represent the request and reply events more accurately.
- It supports repeated samples, filtering, multiple peers, clock drift
  estimation and a hierarchy of time sources.
- It can operate in symmetric mode between peers and does not require one
  node to be a permanent time server for all other nodes.
- Its infrastructure provides fault tolerance through several servers and
  source selection.

NTP disadvantages:

- It is considerably more complex to configure and implement.
- Accuracy is still limited by variable and asymmetric network delays.
- A bad or compromised time source can affect clients unless source selection
  and access controls are configured carefully.
- The hierarchy and periodic polling add traffic and operational overhead.

Cristian's advantages are simplicity and a short request-response exchange.
It is appropriate when a client has access to a trusted server and only needs
an approximate time. Its disadvantages are the dependence on that server, the
need to estimate or know the minimum message delay, and weaker support for
multiple peers, filtering, failures and clock drift. In both algorithms, the
uncertainty must be considered when deciding whether two file modifications
are really ordered.


7. CONCLUSIONS

Good time is time whose error, resolution and drift are bounded tightly enough
for the application and with respect to a stated reference. In the cloud file
service, a timestamp should not be treated as an exact ordering when the
difference between two modifications is smaller than the synchronization
error.

Without GPS or another external reference, a message exchange can select an
internal reference and estimate each clock's deviation. The main unavoidable
limitation is that the exact one-way network delays are unknown. NTP reduces
the effect of this uncertainty with four timestamps, repeated measurements,
peer selection and clock-drift compensation. The worked simulation produced
an offset estimate of 0.045 ms and an accuracy bound of 0.075 ms.

Cristian's algorithm is easier to understand and implement, but for the same
sample its conservative accuracy bound was 0.085 ms and it depends more
strongly on a trusted server and a usable minimum-delay estimate. Neither
algorithm replaces versioning or explicit conflict resolution in a file
service: synchronization improves the evidence used to order events, but it
cannot eliminate concurrent updates or network uncertainty.